--- p1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Systems Development Life Cycle: 
 
Objectives and Requirements 
 
--- p2 ---
2 
 
 
 
 
 
  Systems Development Lifecycle: 
  Objectives and Requirements  is 
 
  ©  Copyright 1984, 1988, 1989, 1993, 2001, 2002, 2003 by: 
 
  Bender RBT Inc. 
  17 Cardinale Lane 
  Queensbury, NY 12804 
  518-743-8755 
  rbender@BenderRBT.com 
   
  No portion of this document may be reproduced in any form 
  or  by any means in whole or in part without the written  
  permission of Bender RBT Inc.. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- p3 ---
3 
 
Chapter 1   Introduction ...................................................................................................4 
Chapter 2   Executive Summary ......................................................................................5 
Chapter 3   Why An SDLC? ............................................................................................6 
Chapter 4   SDLC Objectives ..........................................................................................8 
4.1 Ensure High Quality ......................................................................................8 
4.2 Provide Strong Management Control ............................................................9 
4.3 Maximize Productivity ..................................................................................9 
Chapter 5   SDLC Requirements .....................................................................................11 
5.1 Scope Requirements.......................................................................................11 
5.2 Technical Activities .......................................................................................14 
5.3 Management Activities ..................................................................................30 
5.4 SDLC Usability Requirements ......................................................................42 
5.5 Installation Support Requirements.................................................................43 
Chapter 6   SDLC Design ................................................................................................45 
6.1 An Example Of Itself.....................................................................................45 
6.2 A Layered Approach......................................................................................46 
6.3 Delineate What From How ............................................................................52 
6.4 Hierarchical Structure ....................................................................................53 
6.5 SDLC Automated Support.............................................................................53 
Chapter 7   SDLC Project ................................................................................................53 
COMMON SDLC QUESTIONS.....................................................................................55 
 
--- p4 ---
4 
Chapter 1   Introduction 
 
This document has two objectives.  The first is to explain what a systems development 
lifecycle (SDLC) is and why one is needed.  The second is to provide a yardstick for 
evaluating any SDLC, whether developed intern ally or supplied by a vendor.  This latter 
objective will be met by clearly defining the SDLC's objectives and requirements.  Key 
design approaches for meeting the objectives and requirements will also be discussed. 
 
--- p5 ---
5 
Chapter 2   Executive Summary 
 
A systems development lifecycle (SDLC) has three primary objectives: ensure that high 
quality systems are delivered, provide strong ma nagement controls over the projects, and 
maximize the productivity of the systems staff. 
 
In order to meet these objectives the SDLC has many specific requirements it must meet, 
including: being able to support projects a nd systems of various scopes and types, 
supporting all of the technical activities, supporting all of the management activities, 
being highly usable, and providing guidance on how to install it. 
 
The technical activities include: system defi nition (analysis, design, coding), testing, 
system installation (e.g., training, data conversion), production support (e.g., problem 
management), defining releases, evaluating alternatives, reconciling information across 
phases and to a global view, and defining the project's technical strategy. 
 
The management activities include: setting priorities, defining objectives, project 
tracking and status reporting, change control, risk assessment, step wise commitment, 
cost/benefit analysis, user interaction, managing vendors, post implementation reviews, 
and quality assurance reviews. 
 
In order to meet all of the SDLC's objectiv es and requirements there are certain design 
approaches that are required: the SDLC must be an example of a system created using the 
techniques it espouses; it must use a layered approach to analysis, design, installation 
support and production support; it must keep distinct the "what" from the "how" in 
regards to doing the tasks and creating the outputs; and it must organize its information in 
a hierarchical manner so that users with vary ing degrees of familiarity can find what they 
want easily and quickly. 
 
Defining or selecting an SDLC should be undertaken as a project with full time resources 
who have the appropriate level of expertise.  It is an extremely high leverage effort.  It 
also represents a major cultural change for the staff.  It must be planned and executed in 
as professional a manner as possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- p6 ---
6 
Chapter 3   Why An SDLC? 
 
When you pay your telephone bill your payment is  processed by a system.  That system 
has evolved over many years and continues to evolve in order to meet the changing needs 
of the business.  When the phone compa ny cashes your check that check is also 
processed by a system which itself is evol ving.  These two systems are composed of 
manual activities and automated components.  They also exist in the context of many 
other systems with which they must interface. 
 
Each system works so well individually because  it is composed of a rigorous set of tasks 
which result in well-defined outputs.  Regardless of who is doing the task, the result is 
essentially the same.  As staff turnover occurs  the system provides continuity to the way 
of doing business. 
 
Each system can interface with  the other because the division of activities between the 
bank and the phone company are well defined, as are the interfaces.  Thus, no matter 
which bank the check is drawn on, the pr ocess is the same; no matter which phone 
company sends in the check, the process is the same. 
 
The precision and completeness of the task lis ts, the data, the division of responsibilities 
and the interface definitions are required because of the complexity of these systems.  But 
what about the process that creates and maintains these systems? 
 
Software systems development is, from a hist orical perspective, a very young profession.  
The first official programmer is probably Grace Hopper, working for the Navy in the 
mid-1940s.  More realistically, commercial app lications development did not really take 
off until the early 1960s.  These initial effort s are marked by a craftsman-like approach 
based on what intuitively felt right.  Unfo rtunately, too many programmers had poor 
intuition. 
 
By the late 1960s it had become apparent that a more disciplined approach was required.  
The software engineering techniques started comi ng into being.  This finally brings us to 
the SDLC. 
 
What evolved from these early activities in improving rigor is an understanding of the 
scope and complexity of the total development process.  It became clear that the process 
of creating systems required a system to do system s.  This is the SDLC.  It is the system 
used to build and maintain software systems. 
 
As with the phone billing system, an SDLC sy stem is needed because the development 
process is composed of many complex tasks which must be done in the right order to 
produce a successful result.  If there is no SDLC each team must reinvent it based on 
their own experiences and judgments. 
 
The complexity of the tasks has led to incr eased specialization.  These specialists (e.g., 
data base analysts, network designers, test ers) must have well-bounded tasks with well-
--- p7 ---
7 
defined outputs and well-defined interfaces to th e rest of the development team.  This is 
provided by the SDLC. 
 
Systems also have a long life.  The billi ng system and check processing system will 
probably never be de-automated.  These syst ems will outlive their development teams.  
As staff turnover occurs, continuity is require d in how the systems are supported.  This is 
provided by the SDLC. 
 
Another issue is systems integration.  Can you imagine if the architects designing a sky-
scraper each had their own ways of creating and documenting the building's plans?  The 
plumbing, wiring, heating systems, floors, walls , etc., would never come together.  Most 
computer systems interface with other com puter systems.  The degree of system 
integration is rapidly increasing.  The descrip tions of functions and data at the interfaces 
must be produced and documented in a consistent manner, in much the same way as 
architects must have a standard way of doc umenting plans.  This is provided by the 
SDLC. 
 
You would not dream of trying to process phone  bills or checks without a system due to 
the complexity of the process, the need for specialization, the need for continuity and the 
need to interface to the rest of the world.  We have seen here that the process of 
developing systems has the same characteristics.   Therefore, we need a system to build 
computer systems - the SDLC. 
--- p8 ---
8 
Chapter 4   SDLC Objectives 
 
In the prior chapter a case was made for the necessity of having an SDLC and that the 
SDLC is itself a system.  When we plan to develop, acquire or revise a system we must 
be absolutely clear on the objectives of that system.  The objectives must be stated in 
terms of the expected benefits that the business expects from investing in that system.  
The objectives define the expected return on investment. 
 
An SDLC has three primary business objectives: 
 
- Ensure the delivery of high quality systems; 
 
- Provide strong management controls; 
 
- Maximize productivity. 
 
In other words, the SDLC should ensure th at we can produce more function, with higher 
quality, in less time, with less resources and in a predictable manner. 
 
4.1 Ensure High Quality 
 
Judging the quality of a wine or a meal is a subjective process.  The results of the 
evaluation reflect the tastes and opinions of the taster.  But we need a more rigorous, 
objective approach to evaluating the quality of sy stems.  Therefore, before we can ensure 
that a system has high quality, we must know what quality is in a business context. 
 
The primary definition of quality in a business context is the return on investment (ROI) 
achieved by the system.  The business could have taken the money spent on developing 
and running the system and spent it on advertis ing, product development, staff raises or 
many other things.  However, someone made a decision that if that money was spent on 
the system it would provide the best return or at least a return justifying spending the 
money on it. 
 
This ROI can be the result of such things as : operational cost savings or cost avoidance; 
improved product flexibility resulting in a larger  market share; and/or improved decision 
support for strategic, tactical and operationa l planning.  In each case the ROI should be 
expressed quantitatively, not qualitatively.  Qualitative objectives are almost always 
poorly defined reflections of incompletely analyzed quantitative benefits. 
 
The SDLC must ensure that these objectives are well defined for each project and used as 
the primary measure of success for the project and system. 
 
The business objectives provide the contextual definition of quality.  There is also an 
intrinsic definition of quality.  This definition of quality centers on the characteristics of 
the system itself: is it zero defect, is it well-structured, it is well-documented, is it 
--- p9 ---
9 
functionally robust, etc.  The characteristics are obviously directly linked to the system's 
ability to provide the best possible ROI.  Th erefore, the SDLC must ensure that these 
qualities are built into the system.  However, how far you go in achieving intrinsic 
quality is tempered by the need to keep contextual quality (i.e., ROI) the number one 
priority.  At times there are trade-offs to be made between the two.  Within the 
constraints of the business objectives, the SDLC  must ensure that the system has a high 
degree of intrinsic quality. 
 
4.2 Provide Strong Management Control 
 
The essence of strong management controls is predictability and feedback.  Projects may 
last for many months or even years.  Predictability is provided by being able to accurately 
estimate, as early as possible, how long a project will take, how many resources it will 
require and how much it will cost.  This information is key to determining if the ROI will 
be achieved in a timely manner or at all.  The SDLC must ensure that such planning 
estimates can be put together before there have been any significant expenditures of 
resources, time and money on the project.   The feedback process tells us how well we 
are doing in meeting the plan and the project's objectives.  If we are on target, we need 
that verified.  If there are exceptions, these must be detected as early as possible so that 
corrective actions can be taken in a timely manner.  The SDLC must ensure that 
management has timely, complete and accurate information on the status of the project 
and the system throughout the development process.   
 
4.3 Maximize Productivity 
 
There are two basic definitions of productiv ity.  One centers on what you are building; 
the other is from the perspective of how many resources, how much time and how much 
money it takes to build it.   The first defi nition of productivity is based on the return on 
investment (ROI) concept.  What value is there in doing the wrong system twice as fast? 
It would be like taking a trip to the wrong pl ace in a plane that was twice as fast.  You 
might have been able to simply walk to the correct destination.  Therefore, the best way 
to measure a project team's or system department's productivity is to measure the net ROI 
of their efforts.  The SDLC mu st not just ensure that the expected ROI for each project is 
well defined.  It must ensure that the projects being done are those with the maximum 
possible ROI opportunities of all of the potential projects. 
 
Even if every project in the queue has significan t ROI benefits associated with it, there is 
a practical limit to how large and how fast th e systems organization can grow.  We need 
to make the available staff as productive as possible with regard to the time, money and 
resources required to deliver a given amount of  function.  The first issue we face is the 
degree to which the development process is labor intensive.  Part of the solution lies in 
automation.  The SDLC must be designed in such a way as to take maximum advantage 
of the computer assisted software engineering (CASE) tools. 
 
--- p10 ---
10 
The complexity of the systems and the technology they use has required increased 
specialization.  These specialized skills are often scarce.  The SDLC must delineate the 
tasks and deliverables in such a way as to ensure that specialized resources can be 
brought to bear on the project in the most effective and efficient way possible. 
 
One of the major wastes of resources on a proj ect is having to do things over.  Scrap and 
rework occurs due to such things as errors and changes in scope.  The SDLC must ensure 
that scrap and rework is minimized.   Another activity that results in non-productive 
effort is the start-up time for new resources being added to the project.  The SDLC must 
ensure that start-up time is minimized in a ny way possible.   A fi nal opportunity area for 
productivity improvements is the use of off- the-shelf components.  Many applications 
contain functions identical to those in other applications.  The SDLC should ensure that if 
useful components already exist, they can be re-used in many applications. 
 
 
 
What we have identified so far are the prim ary business objectives of the SDLC and the 
areas of opportunity we should focus on in m eeting these objectives.  What we must now 
do is translate these objectives into a set of requirements and design points for the SDLC. 
--- p11 ---
11 
Chapter 5   SDLC Requirements 
 
 
The requirements for the SDLC fall into five major categories: 
 
- Scope 
 
- Technical Activities 
 
- Management Activities 
 
- Usability 
 
- Installation Guidance 
 
The scoping requirements bound what types of systems and projects are supported by the 
SDLC. The technical and management ac tivities define the types of tasks and 
deliverables to be considered in the project.  The usability requirements address the 
various ways in which the SDLC will be us ed by the team members and what must be 
considered in making the SDLC easy to use in all cases.  The installation requirements 
address the needs associated with phasing the SDLC into use, possibly piece by piece, 
over time. 
 
5.1 Scope Requirements 
 
The SDLC must be able to support various project types, project sizes and system types. 
 
5.1.1 Project Types 
 
There are five project types that the SDLC must support: 
 
- New Development 
 
- Rewrites of Existing Systems 
 
- Maintenance 
 
- Package Selection 
 
- System Conversions 
 
 
  
--- p12 ---
12 
 
New Development 
 
A totally new system development effort imp lies that there is no existing system.  You 
have a blank sheet of paper and total latitude  in defining its requirements and design.  In 
reality this is a rather rare occurance. 
 
Rewrites 
 
In a rewrite there is an existing system but the current design has degenerated to become 
so poorly structured that it is difficult to ma intain or add any significant new features.  
Therefore, a new system will be created to take its place.  However, there is a necessity to 
retain a high degree of functional compatib ility with the existing system.  Thus, you 
might go from a batch system to an on-line system, from a centralized system to a 
distributed system, etc., but the core business (i.e., logical) functions remain the same. 
 
Maintenance 
 
Here we must be careful to make the dis tinction between a management definition of 
maintenance and a technical definition.  From a management perspective, some 
organizations call any project of under six pers on months, or some similar resource limit, 
that affects an existing system a maintenance project.  Some even reduce this to just the 
effort required to fix errors and comply with regulatory changes.  This can also be called 
"zero-based maintenance", after zero-ba sed budgeting, since anything over that is 
discretionary.  The rest is called development. 
 
We prefer to use a technical definition of maintenance to mean any incremental 
improvements to an existing system, regardless of the size of the changes.  The rationale 
for this is that the techniques and tools requi red to go into an existing system differ from 
those where there is a blank sheet of paper. 
 
Package Selection 
 
Package selection involves evaluating, acqui ring, tailoring and installing third party 
software. 
 
       
System Conversions 
 
A system conversion involves translating a syst em to run in a new environment.  This 
includes conversions to a new language, a new operating system, a new computer, new 
disk drives, a new DBMS, etc.  In doing the translation, the system is not redesigned.  It 
is ported over to the new environment on a one-to-one basis to the extent possible. 
 
 In reality, projects are often a blend of th ese various project types.  For example, a 
package installation may also require main tenance changes to interfacing systems, 
--- p13 ---
13 
developing some new code, converting other c ode to run on a compatible configuration 
and rewriting portions of some systems.  Th e SDLC must handle each project type and 
any blend of them. 
 
5.1.2 Project Sizes 
 
Projects come in many sizes.  Some may la st as short as a day, staffed by only one 
person.  Others may last many years, staffed by hundreds of people scattered across many 
development locations.  The types and degree of the management controls, such as 
project check-points and status reporting, change depending on the size of the effort.  The 
SDLC must accommodate the full range of project sizes without burdening the small 
project nor over simplifying to the detriment of the large project. 
 
5.1.3 System Types 
 
The SDLC must be able to support: 
 
- Batch systems, on-line systems, real time systems. 
 
- Mainframe, client-server, web, PC, imbedded systems. 
 
- Centralized systems and distributed systems. 
 
- Stand-alone systems and integrated systems. 
 
- Automated systems and manual systems. 
 
The SDLC must support each of these and any combination of them. 
 
 The SDLC actually needs to support the full ra nge of combinations and permutations of 
the various project types, project sizes and sy stem types.  It must do this in a single 
lifecycle.  Creating a unique lifecycle for each  possible combination of the above would 
result in literally billions of SDLC's.  (We leave the computation up to the reader.) 
 
--- p14 ---
14 
5.2 Technical Activities 
 
 
The technical activities fall into a number of major categories: 
 
- System Definition  (Analysis, Design, Coding) 
 
- Testing 
 
- System Installation  (e.g., Data Conversion, Training) 
 
- Production Support  (e.g., Problem Management) 
 
- Evaluating Alternatives 
 
- Defining Releases 
 
- Reconciling Information Across Multiple Phases 
 
- Reconciling To A Global View 
 
- Defining The Project's Technical Strategy) 
 
In addressing each of these topics we will need to distinguish what tasks must be 
performed from how they might be performed.  This distinction is important since the 
"how-to" is dependent on the specific software engineering techniques selected and the 
available CASE tools.  However, the "what"  should be generic and stable, regardless of 
the techniques and tools. 
 
5.2.1 System Definition 
 
In defining the requirements for supporting analysis, design and coding we must consider 
three aspects of the problem: system components, the categories of requirements and 
system views. 
 
 System Components 
 
Regardless of the techniques being used, we can  say that any system can be said to be 
composed of nine basic component types: 
 
- Use Cases 
 
- Functions 
 
- Triggers 
 
--- p15 ---
15 
- Data Stores 
 
- Data Flows 
 
- Data Elements 
 
- Processors 
 
- Data Storage 
 
- Data Connections 
 
- Actors/External Entities 
 
Use Cases are an ordered set of processes, initiated by a specific trigger (e.g., transaction, 
end of day), which accomplish a meaningful un it of work from the perspective of the 
user. 
 
Functions are context independent processes that transform data and/or determine the 
state of entities. 
 
Triggers are the events that intiate Use Case s.  There are three types of triggers: time 
triggers, state triggers and transaction triggers. 
 
Data stores are data at rest.  Data flows ar e data in movement between two processes, a 
process and a data store, etc. 
 
Data elements are the atomic units within data flows and data stores. 
 
Processors are the components which execute the processes and events (i.e., computers 
and people). 
 
Data storage is the repository in which the da ta stores reside (e.g., disks, tapes, filing 
cabinets). 
 
Data connections are the pipelines th rough which the data flows flow (e.g., 
communications network, the mail). 
 
Actors/External entities are people or system s outside the scope of the system under 
investigation but with which it must interface. 
 
Each of these components has many properties or attributes which are needed to fully 
describe them.  For example, in describing a process we can state its algorithm, who or 
what executes it, where it takes place, when it takes place, how much information it must 
process, etc.  Figure 1 lists the propertie s which can be described for the various 
component types. 
--- p16 ---
16 
 
In a given project and for a given co mponent, the properties which must be 
gathered/defined may vary.  The SDLC must allow for this flexibility versus an all-or-
nothing approach. 
 
Categories Of Requirements 
 
There are at least ten major categories of requirements which must be addressed by the 
analysis and design process: 
 
- Function 
 
- Performance 
 
- Usability 
 
- Reliability, Availability, Serviceability 
 
- Localization 
 
- Portability 
 
- Maintainability 
 
- Security 
 
- Testability 
 
- Extendibility 
 
Functional requirements define what da ta the system must produce and what 
transformations of that data the system must be able to do. 
 
Performance requirements describe how fast  it must do the transformations, how many it 
must do and any limitations on the amount of u tilization of the agents used to support the 
transformation (e.g., amount of machine time, amount of disk space). 
 
Usability requirements describe the ergonomics of the system (e.g., ease of correctly 
interpreting the information on a screen). 
 
Reliability defines the degree of accuracy requi red in the transforms.  In billing this 
would be 100%.  In weather forecasting it coul d be plus or minus 5% for a short term 
forecast.  Availability defines the amount of time the system is actually up during the 
time periods it is supposed to be up.  This is  usually defined as a percentage, qualified 
with standard deviations.  Mean time to failu re, by type of failure, further defines system 
availability.  Serviceability addresses how quickly the system can be corrected when it is 
--- p17 ---
17 
discovered to be unreliable or unavailable.  Th is might be expressed as the mean time to 
fix.  Mean time to fix is usually qualified by the type and severity of the failures. 
 
--- p18 ---
18 
 
COMPONENT FUNCTION DATA STORE DATA FLOW DATA ELEMENT USE 
CASE 
EXTERNAL ENTITY/ 
ACTOR 
       
PROPERTY       
            
     Identification       
          Name X X X X X X 
          Date X X X X X X 
          Version Number X X X X X X 
          Aliasing X X X X X X 
          Description X X X X X X 
     Cross-Reference       
          Parents X X X X X X 
          Migration X X X X X X 
          Source/Sinks   X    
          Inputs/Outputs X X   X X 
          Model X X X X X X 
          Information Sources X X X X X X 
     Design Axioms X X X  X  
     Component Composition       
          Census X X X  X  
          Organization  X X    
          Syntax/Structure  X X    
          Trigger     X  
          Processes     X  
          Process Parameters X    X  
          Algorithim X      
      Processing Characteristics       
          Rate of Flow   X    
          Volume X X    X 
          Access  X     
          Periodicity X     X 
          Rate of Processing X     X 
          Processing Windows X     X 
          Maintenance  X     
          Security X X X  X X 
          Integrity (R.A.S.) X X X  X X 
          Priority X    X X 
       
   FIGURE 1    
 
--- p19 ---
19 
 
COMPONENT FUNCTION DATA STORE DATA FLOW DATA ELEMENT USE 
CASE 
EXTERNAL ENTITY/ 
ACTOR 
           
Agent Chartacteristics       
     Data Connection Char.   X    
         Medium   X    
         Size   X    
         Encoding Method   X    
         Connection Requirement   X    
               Type   X    
               I.D.   X    
               Source/Sink   X    
               Flow Requirements   X    
               % Capacity   X    
               R.A.S.   X    
               Environment   X    
     Data Storage Char.       
          Medium  X     
          Size  X     
          Encoding  X     
          Storage  X     
               Type  X     
               I.D.  X     
               Location  X     
               Volume  X     
               % Capacity  X     
               R.A.S.  X     
               Environment  X     
     Processor Characteristics       
          Type X      
          I.D. X      
          Location X      
          Size X      
          % Utilization X      
          Required Features X      
          R.A.S. X      
          Environment X      
      Costs       
          Cost per Unit X X X  X X 
          Cost for Availability X X X   X 
     Value        
          Replacement Cost X X X   X 
          Fair Market Value X X   X  
          Business Value X X X  X  
       
 FIGURE 1 CONTINUED     
 
 
--- p20 ---
20 
Localization describes the ability to adapt the application to different languages, 
character sets, and cultures to support international users. 
 
Portability describes the need to be able to quickly adapt the application to run on 
different technology. 
 
Maintainability describes the need for people to  be able to quickly and reliably identify 
where changes must be made to the system. 
 
Security describes the systems ability to restrict who can do what to what and when. 
 
Extendibility describes the system's ability to absorb major modifications to changes in 
any of the above requirements, while minimizing the impact to the rest of the system.  
This is usually described in terms of cha nge scenarios accompanied with the probability 
the change will be needed and the probable time frame in which it will occur. 
 
Depending on the application, there may be some  other "ilities" that are important.  For 
example, systems supporting people who travel a lot, such as salesmen, have a 
requirement for ease of physical portabilit y.  However, in general the above six 
categories are sufficient. 
 
 System Views 
 
The analysis and design approach must allow th e system definition to be viewed from an 
external viewpoint and an internal viewpoint .  The external viewpoint is also often 
referred to as the logical or user or requirements-oriented view.  The internal viewpoint is 
also called the physical or design oriented viewpoint. 
 
An SDLC must also allow these various view s from the perspective of the total system, 
from a single component, or anything in between. 
 
 One problem we face in this discussion is  terminology.  In evaluating an SDLC the 
important thing is whether or not each item is fully addressed.  It is less important what 
these things are called or how the collection of them is organized. 
 
 Analysis And Design Techniques And Tools 
 
In the above discussion we focused exclusivel y on what information must be gathered in 
the analysis process or defined in the desi gn process.  This information is totally 
independent of how we gather or define it.   The SDLC should, however, also aid us in 
showing us how the various analysis and de sign techniques and tools fit into actually 
doing this work.  Unfortunately, we have a cornucopia of techniques to choose from.  Do 
we use the process driven approach of Your don-Constantine or the data driven approach 
of Jackson-Warnier-Orr?  Do we use JAD's?  Do we use rapid prototyping? 
 
--- p21 ---
21 
The list of the techniques could go on and on.  The optimal approach would be for the 
SDLC to describe how each of  the various techniques - the "how to" - can be used to 
create the above information - the "whats".  This would leave the "how to" up the project 
teams.  This flexibility is desired since the "best" technique is dependent on the 
application type, available tools, and personal preferences and experiences. 
 
5.2.2 Testing 
 
In defining the SDLC's testing oriented require ments, we must break this topic up a bit.  
We need to discuss what is being tested, when  testing must occur, the steps in testing, the 
properties to test for and the definition of the overall testing effort. 
 
 What To Test 
 
What do you test?  In a word - everything.  The objectives must be verified. The 
requirements, design and code must be teste d.  The user manuals must be tested.  The 
installation support systems and materials must be tested - e.g., training materials, data 
conversion programs.  Even the test support system must be tested.  The SDLC must 
ensure that all products are tested in a rigorous manner. 
 
 When To Test 
 
Numerous studies have shown that the earlier you test, the cheaper the costs.  The cost 
difference between finding an error early in the requirements definition versus once it is 
in production have been found to be as much as 270 to 1500 times as expensive.  Prior to 
system release the issue is scrap and rework.  The later an error is found, the greater the 
impact on work already completed.  It is lik e finding out after a building is constructed 
that the plumbing has been omitted.  If some one had noticed this omission early in the 
blue-print stage, the costs would have been minimal. 
 
After system release, the issue is not just sc rap and rework, but the impact that the error 
had on the business and its customers.  There are hundreds of examples of a simple error, 
from the perspective of what it took to fix the code, costing the business many millions of 
dollars. 
 
The issue of when to test is tightly coupl ed to the issue of knowing when a task is 
complete.  Each task should result in a sp ecific set of outputs.  The task cannot be 
considered complete until these outputs have been verified to be complete and correct.  
This is done via testing.  Therefore, testing is  a part of every step, not just an activity 
done once code is written or just at phase ch eckpoints.  The SDLC must integrate testing 
throughout the entire project lifecycle so that each work product is tested as it is created. 
 
--- p22 ---
22 
 Testing Steps 
 
Regardless of the specific techniques and tools used for testing, there are six basic steps 
to testing anything.  These steps are: 
 
- Define Test Criteria 
 
- Design Test Cases 
 
- Build Test Cases 
 
- Execute Tests 
 
- Verify Test Results 
 
- Store Test Cases 
 
The first step is to define the test criteria.  The criteria defines how to measure the 
success of the testing and defines what is cons idered the completeness criteria for testing.  
In other words, it tells you when you are done  testing and whether or not the product 
passed the test.  An example of this is to set a criteria that testing must execute every 
functional variation, every code statement and every branch vector at least once. 
 
The second step is to design tests that meet  the desired success criteria.  The techniques 
employed should be rigorous and algorithmic rather than subjective. 
 
The third step is to build the test cases.  This process could range from creating paper 
based tests used in walk-throughs to building fu ll test data bases and test transaction files 
used in machine-based testing. 
 
The fourth step is to execute the tests.  This process is performed both by computers and 
people.  For example, this is where the walk-through process fits into the overall testing 
activity.  It is the test execution process used  before the code is built.  It does not, in 
itself, define the criteria, design the tests or build them. 
 
The fifth step is verifying the results of the test executions.  You must ensure that 
everything was tested (based on the coverage criteria) and that you got the correct answer 
for every test (based on the test case design). 
 
The sixth step in testing is storing the tests in  such a way that they can be used in future 
testing efforts, both within this project and for future releases. 
 
The SDLC must provide guidance for doing each of these testing steps. 
 
  
Properties To Test For 
--- p23 ---
23 
 
In our discussion of the categories of requi rements we identified function, performance, 
usability, reliability, availability, serviceability, localization, portability, maintainability, 
security, and extendibility.  The testing proce ss in the SDLC must test for each of the 
properties. 
 
 Definition Of The Overall Testing Effort 
 
Summarizing the above discussion, the SDLC supports testing every product, at each 
stage in its creation, for each of the de sired categories of requirements/design 
characteristics, via the six basic steps of testing. 
 
In defining the specific techniques and tools to do this the process gets even more 
complicated.  The reason is that many of the testing steps can be affected by the 
architecture of the system and its target c onfiguration environment.  For example, you 
may need a different test coverage monitor for each language the code is written in, each 
operating system the code will run on and each machine the code will run on. 
 
Since the testing process is such a key asp ect of the overall development process, the 
SDLC must provide information and guida nce on what and how each of the testing 
concerns will be addressed. 
 
Note: In defining the overall testing process for a given project, many of the issues are 
the same as for the installation activities and will be covered with them.  (See "Defining 
The Installation Process" in the next section.) 
 
5.2.3 System Installation 
 
There are five topics which describe the pr ocess of converting from the existing system 
to the new one: 
 
- Data Conversion 
 
- Training 
 
- Facilities Installation 
 
- Hardware/Software Installation 
 
- Production Cutover 
 
Data conversion is the process of translating the data from the existing data formats and 
data definitions to those required by the new system. 
 
Training is the process of teaching all users of the system how to use the functions and 
features of the new systems.  Users may include operational staff, management, computer 
--- p24 ---
24 
operations, maintenance programmers and even  customers.  The training process must 
factor in cutover training and on-going training.  Cutover training focuses on mapping the 
old way of doing things onto the new way.  On -going training addresses the fact that, as 
turnover occurs, new people will have to be fully trained from scratch on the production 
system. 
 
Facilities installation addresses the installa tion and set-up of the office space, phones, 
desks, etc., required to support the manual porti ons of the system.  It also covers the 
physical preparation of the environment in wh ich the computers will be installed such as 
raised floor, power, cooling, etc. 
 
Hardware/software installation is the proce ss of installing the vendor supplied computer 
configuration and supplemental applications required to support the system being 
developed.  This includes both the devel opment/test configuration and the production 
configuration. 
 
Production cutover is the process of defining and supporting the approach for phasing the 
new system into production.  For example,  you could do a drop dead cutover where 
everyone is cut over to the new system at the same time.  You could also phase the 
system in one site at a time.  You could ev en phase it in function by function.  (Note that 
a phased installation of function is distinct from phased development of those functions.) 
 
 Defining The Installation Process 
 
For each of the installation topics, and for th e overall testing effort as well, there are a 
number of activities which must take place: 
 
- Setting Goals 
 
-Doing An Impact Assessment 
 
- Defining The Strategy 
 
- Defining The Stages 
 
- Defining And Building The Support Systems 
 
Setting Goals: 
 
The project has a set of business goals that define the expected ROI for the project.  
Some of these will be reflected in the specific installation topics.  For example, a project 
goal to improve customer service could be reflected in a data conversion goal to scrub the 
existing files for redundant or inaccurate data as  part of the data conversion process, thus 
improving operational efficiency.  That same  project goal might manifest itself in 
production cutover as a goal to phase the new system in with minimal disruptions to 
customer service.  Each project goal, then, must be reviewed from the perspective of each 
--- p25 ---
25 
installation activity to define goals for th at activity which are supportive of the overall 
project goals. 
 
Impact Assessment: 
 
Each installation/test activity can be comp lex and expensive in its own right.  How 
rigorous to be is dependent on the degree of  change represented by the new system and 
potential problems that might be caused if th e activity is not handled perfectly.  For 
example, a system that monitors patient care in the critical ward of a hospital could cause 
a death if there are any errors in it.  On the other hand, a one time report on the number of 
patients treated this year may have little impact if slightly off.  The impact of an error 
would be very different and thus the necessary level of testing would be different. 
 
Strategy: 
 
For each of these activities, the basic appro ach for doing them must be defined.  For 
example, data conversion could be done usi ng separate data conversion programs or via 
the production data base build transactions.  The choice of the approach will affect the 
schedules for the completion of the build  functions, bound the required support systems 
and affect the procedures for ensuring the integrity of the new data bases. 
 
Stages: 
 
Any of the installation activities can be, and us ually are, done in stages.  The testing of 
code may go through unit, component and system  testing.  Training might be staged to 
first train the trainers, then a pilot group, then  the rest of the organization.  For each stage 
you need to define: 
 
 
 
The units (e.g., specific people to train in a group; specific modules to test together 
 
The sequence of the units (e.g., train department A, then department B) 
 
The support system dependencies (i.e., the portions of the supporting programs, tools and 
procedures needed for this stage) 
 
The entry/exit criteria for the stage (i.e ., the quantitative and qualitative criteria for 
beginning and ending each stage)) 
 
 
 
 Support System: 
 
The support system includes the systems and pro cedures that will be used to perform the 
activity.  This might involve developing the support system (e.g., data conversion 
--- p26 ---
26 
programs), acquiring an existing tool from a vendor (e.g., a test monitor), and/or simply 
using pre-existing components from a prior effort. 
 
The SDLC must contain the steps and guidelines  for defining each of these aspects of the 
various installation/test efforts. 
 
 Integrating The Installation And Test Activities 
 
There is a requirement to see if the needs of  one activity depend on the results of another 
or if the results of one activity could be useful to another.  This allows optimization of the 
installation activities from the project perspec tive.  For example, the initial user training 
effort could be synchronized with the testi ng effort to allow the users to aid in the 
execution of the test scripts.  Similarly, th e test cases, which should represent one of 
everything the system does, could be used as materials for the training classes.  Thus, the 
SDLC should contain the activities to reconc ile and synchronize the installation/test 
activities with each other in a timely manner. 
 
5.2.4 Production Support 
 
Once the system is put into production, th ere are a number of on-going activities that 
directly support it.  These are: 
 
- Problem Management 
 
- Release Management 
 
- Publications Support 
 
Problem management addresses the issue of how  errors in the system encountered by the 
users/customers in production will be handled.  This includes error reporting procedures 
(e.g., production hot-lines), problem diagnostics, error correction procedures and problem 
tracking (e.g., mean-time-to-failure, mean-time-to-fix by problem severity). 
 
Release management addresses the issue of how  new versions of the application will be 
distributed and how version control will be ma naged when different sites have different 
versions of the system. 
 
Publications support concerns the logis tics problems of physically producing and 
distributing the various user manuals. 
 
These issues have traditionally only been of concern to the system vendors.  For example, 
IBM is the second largest publisher in the wo rld (the U.S. federal government is the 
largest).  However, as applications have gr own larger, more complex and distributed, the 
problems in-house applications groups face ta ke on more of the characteristics of a 
vendor supplied product.  The SDLC must include the activities to analyze these needs 
and prepare the appropriate support systems. 
--- p27 ---
27 
 
For each of these activities there are a number of items which must be considered: 
 
- Goals 
 
- User Profile 
 
- Strategy 
 
Support Systems 
 
The definition of support goals is the same approach taken in defining the installation 
goals - i.e., what portions of the overall pr oject and system goals will be specifically 
supported by these activities and how should th ey be expressed from that activity's 
perspective. 
 
The user profile analysis addresses tailori ng the support processes to how the production 
system is used.  The problem management needs would be different for an on-line system 
up 24 hours a day 7 days a week than for a batch system run between 3PM and 5PM 
Mondays. 
 
The support systems are the computer systems and manual procedures used to support the 
activity. 
 
The SDLC must ensure that each of these topics is addressed in a thorough and timely 
manner. 
 
5.2.5 Defining Releases 
 
Attempting to build and install a very larg e system in one massive project almost 
guarantees failure.  The larger the project sc ope the more time, people, coordination, etc., 
are required.  At some point the size reaches  the point where no one can get their arms 
around it and control it.  The long time fram es needlessly delay many benefits which 
could be achieved with a small subset of th e functions (the 80/20 rule).  The degree of 
change on the user that the total system re presents can be overwhelming.  Even if you 
could build the system, the user could not absorb it into their operations. 
 
 
For all of these reasons and many more, it is often advisable to break a given system into 
multiple releases.  In doing this you must ensure that: 
 
- each release meets specific business goals; 
 
- that each release delivers a coherent set of functions; 
 
--- p28 ---
28 
- that the  releases are staged and designed in such a way as to minimize scrap and 
rework in the subsequent releases; 
 
- that the installation support and production s upport are also properly staged in concert 
with the application releases. 
 
The SDLC must ensure that the process of defining releases is robust enough to cover all 
of these issues. 
 
5.2.6 Evaluating Alternatives 
 
For a given set of objectives there may be  many ways to meet them.  It is not 
unreasonable to explore in some level of detail more than one alternative before deciding 
on the final approach.  This can actually become a complex task.  Consider that for a 
given set of objectives there are one or more  scopes of analysis.  For each scope of 
analysis, there are one or more possible desi gns.  For each design, there are one or more 
installation approaches and one or more pr oduction support approaches.  The fan out of 
alternatives grows exponentially.  To make it even worse, there are, for each one of these 
alternatives, one or more options in staging them in releases. 
 
Even in evaluating a given alternative, there are various levels of detail to which you can 
go before making your decision.  In large complex systems where the stakes are very 
high to the business, some organizations have chosen to actually build and install in pilot 
programs more than one alternative before making the final decision.  The SDLC must 
support the creation and evaluation of alternatives to whatever degree the business 
decides is appropriate for that system. 
 
5.2.7 Reconciling Information Across Phases 
 
All SDLCs break the project lif ecycle into phases.  This is one of the most basic 
management controls.  One implication of this  is that the processes of analysis, design, 
installation planning, production support pla nning and testing can be spread across 
multiple phases.  The SDLC must ensure that  the work has continuity from phase to 
phase. 
 
 
 
 
5.2.8 Reconciling To A Global View 
 
Very few systems and projects exist in isol ation from other systems.  There are many 
levels of integration.  A low level of integr ation occurs where multiple applications share 
a given hardware/software configuration.  It mu st be validated that the next application 
will not degrade the execution of the others.  Another example of low level integration 
for systems is the installation's standards such as program naming conventions. 
 
--- p29 ---
29 
At a higher and more tightly coupled level there is the creation of truly integrated 
systems.  Systems tightly integrate in a number of ways: via shared data bases, via shared 
networks, via shared interface standards (e.g., screen formats), via shared application 
utility functions and via shared off-the-shelf code.  When this level of integration is 
desired, then there must be an Applicati ons Architecture group(s).  This group has the 
responsibility to define the global structure and to ensure that each team is conforming to 
it. 
 
The process of reconciling what one project team is doing to this global view is not 
something that just happens at a few major ch eckpoints.  It must be an on-going activity.  
The SDLC must address how best to perfor m this activity in a complete and timely 
manner. 
 
5.2.9 Defining The Project's Technical Strategy 
 
For every technical topic that we have just  covered there are numerous decisions to be 
made.  We need to decide such things as wh at information is needed, how best to gather 
or create that information, how to organize and display that information, and how to store 
and maintain the information.  This involve s many decisions about what tasks to do (e.g., 
do we need worry about hardware/software insta llation for this project).  It also involves 
decisions about what software engineering techniques to use and which CASE tools to 
use. 
 
These decisions are not just made once at the beginning of the project.  The best technical 
strategy for getting started may not be the best one for detailing out the system definition.  
Thus, the SDLC must make this an explicit set of tasks at appropriate points throughout 
the lifecycle. 
 
The change control procedure contains a number of key steps.  The first is to determine 
who will decide the fate of a requested change.  The second is to define the procedures 
for submitting and evaluating changes.  The th ird is to identify the points in the SDLC 
process where each given deliverable will come  under change control.  The SDLC must 
describe how each of these steps will be accomplished.    
 
 
--- p30 ---
30 
 5.3 Management Activities 
 
Project management is the process of  planning, organizing, staffing, directing, 
coordinating and controlling a project.  These activities are as much a part of the SDLC 
as the technical tasks identified in the prior section.  Specifically, the SDLC must contain 
tasks and guidance on the following topics: 
 
- Setting Priorities 
 
- Defining Objectives 
 
- Planning And Estimating 
 
- Tracking/Status Reporting 
 
- Change Control 
 
- Step Wise Commitment 
 
- Cost/Benefit Analysis 
 
- Risk Assessments 
 
- Interacting With Users 
 
- Managing Vendors 
 
- Post Implementation Reviews 
 
- Quality Assurance Reviews 
 
5.3.1 Setting Priorities 
 
There are two levels of setting priorities.  The highest level concerns managing the 
project queues for the entire systems departme nt.  The second level of priority setting 
occurs within a system and/or project. 
 
 
 Prioritizing The Department Project Queues 
 
The overall project queue is, or should be, th e result of the strategic systems planning 
process.  In this process, the strategic busine ss plan is analyzed to determine what system 
support is required to support the organization' s initiatives.  This is actually a two way 
process since technology creates business opportunities. 
 
--- p31 ---
31 
The strategic systems planning process is genera lly viewed as outside of the scope of an 
SDLC.  The SDLC begins with a specific proj ect request or idea.  However, the SDLC 
must interface to this process.  The prior ities in the overall queue are based on a number 
of assumptions about the potential ROI and tim ing of the various projects.  The SDLC 
must support being able to quickly verify or modify these assumptions.  This information 
is then fed back to the systems planning pro cess so that adjustments to the priorities can 
be made. 
 
Similarly, the SDLC interfaces with the product planning process.  The analysis of the 
strategic business plan may result in a numbe r of product planning projects.  These in 
turn may result in systems projects. 
 
In essence, the strategic business planning pr ocess forms the highest level context.  It 
then spawns and bounds the strategic syst ems planning process and product planning 
process.  These in turn drive the creation of the project queues which trigger initiating the 
activities in the SDLC.  The SDLC, therefore mu st be able to interface to these other, 
more global, planning activities. 
 
 Prioritizing Within A System/Project 
 
 For systems under maintenance, resources are not allocated at the beginning of the year 
to specific changes.  Resources are allocated  on a level of effort basis - e.g., system X 
will be allocated ten person years worth of support this year.  How those resources are 
specifically allocated will be decided as part  of an on-going process between the user and 
the systems support team. 
 
Similarly, this same process can occur even  within a development effort.  There are 
always trade-offs to be made between time, function and resources in meeting the 
project's objectives.  This affects the scope of  analysis and the functions to be included 
within the current release.  Again, priorities are being set as to what are the most 
important things to do. 
 
The SDLC must support the managing of both the maintenance priorities and the intra-
project development priorities. 
 
 5.3.2 Defining Objectives 
 
Objectives 
 
Objectives are the statements of what bene fits the organization hopes to achieve as a 
result of investing in the project  and the system.  They define why the project is being 
done.  It is a distinct statement from what is to be delivered. 
 
A fully stated objective defines the desire d ROI in quantitative terms.  Qualitative 
benefits are usually poorly defined quantita tive benefits. The objectives are further 
refined by stating the time frames and resour ce limits within which the objectives are to 
--- p32 ---
32 
b e  m e t .   T h e  S D L C  m u s t  e n s u r e  t h a t  f ully defined objectives are identified at the 
beginning of any project.  It should then use these objectives to guide the process of 
analysis of design to ensure that the project stays focused on these objectives.  The SDLC 
should use these objectives as the primary m easure of the success of the project and the 
system. 
 
This statement of goals is distinct from th e cost/benefit analysis.  The objectives define 
the desired ROI.  The cost/benefit analysis defines the projected ROI based on what is 
known about the project and the system under development.  These may exceed or fall 
short of the desired ROI.  The post implementation review identifies the actual ROI 
achieved by the project and system.  The SD LC must maintain the distinction among 
objectives, cost/benefits and post implementation analysis. 
 
 System Objectives Versus Project Objectives 
 
When a system is first created, it is created with specific on-going objectives in mind - 
e.g., reduce operational costs.  Thereafter, num erous projects will modify that system.  
Each project will have its own distinct objectives.  However, the cumulative effect of 
these incremental projects might negate the sy stem's ability to meet its overall objectives.  
The SDLC must make the distinction between  system objectives and project objectives.  
It must also include the activities for reconciling these two and updating the system 
objectives from those project objectives which reflect on-going goals. 
 
 Reconciling Objectives 
 
Individual projects often affect many different  user groups.  Each group may have their 
own idea as to the project's objectives and the priorities of those objectives.  For example, 
the operations group would be concerned about operational efficiency while the 
marketing group is concerned about market sh are.  The first might imply a functionally 
simple version of the system while the s econd might want all the bells and whistles 
possible. Somehow these apparently conf licting objectives must be reconciled and 
prioritized.  The SDLC must make this pr ocess explicit and provide guidance on how to 
accomplish it. 
 
 5.3.3 Planning And Estimating 
 
A project plan is composed of tasks, de pendencies, resources, schedules and budgets.  
The tasks define what you will do and wh at will be produced.  The dependencies 
determine the order in which the tasks must  be done.  The resources identify who will do 
the tasks.  The schedule states when the tasks will begin and end.  The budget defines 
how much all this will cost. 
 
  
--- p33 ---
33 
Generic Project Plan 
 
The cornerstone of the planning process is the completeness of the task list.  The are two 
sources of information for identifying the required tasks.  The first is the SDLC itself.  It 
is the generic project plan containing th e master check-list all of the tasks and 
deliverables which the project manager must consider. 
 
The SDLC must be robust enough to provide th is complete generic list regardless of the 
project's scope, etc.  It should identify the dependencies between these tasks.  It should 
provide guidance on the degree to which thes e tasks can be overlapped.  This would 
allow the project manager to optimize the plan  for minimizing resources or for delivering 
the product in the shortest amount of time. 
 
 Specific Project Plan 
 
Most of the specific tasks come from the results  of the analysis and design effort itself.  
For example, the SDLC would identify at what  point the data base design effort is done 
and would describe the tasks for doing it.  Ho wever, it is the results of the project's 
analysis that would tell how many data bases must be designed. 
 
This presents us with a problem.  How can we plan the project if the plan is the result of 
outputs from the project?  The basic issue is that projects are research and development 
efforts.  Until the research portion of the project is completed, you do not know how long 
it will take, how much it will cost or whether the system can even be built.  This is 
because there are still unknowns which can affect the project's scope and feasibility. 
 
The SDLC must recognize the research and de velopment nature of projects.  It must 
ensure that the research portion of the project is completely and thoroughly done as 
quickly as possible.  It must also recognize that planning is an iterative, on-going process 
throughout the entire project. 
 
 Estimating 
 
A plan is basically a prediction of the future - an educated guess.  It contains many 
estimates.  You estimate how large the deliver able from each task will be.  You estimate 
the productivity rate that will be achieved in  producing that deliverable.  You estimate 
the elapsed time involved for the task.  Th e accuracy of these estimates will vary 
depending on the amount of information availa ble, who is doing the estimates and the 
techniques used. 
 
The completeness of the information availa ble to the planning process was addressed 
above.  The SDLC can do nothing about who is doing the estimating.  However, the 
SDLC must support the estimating process in a number of ways. 
 
First, the SDLC should discuss the various formalized estimating techniques that have 
been developed over the years  (e.g., expe rt judgment, analogy). Second, the SDLC 
--- p34 ---
34 
should support the accumulation and use of info rmation from past projects.  The SDLC 
should include the activities for using and updating this project history data base. 
 
 Reconciling To A Global Plan 
 
Projects today require many specialized skills.  These skills are often collected into 
groups which support many projects at the sa me time (e.g., data administration, test 
teams).  The quantity and timing of these shar ed resources must be synchronized with all 
the other projects that need those same resources. 
 
Planning conflicts can arise over the facilities th at a team needs to complete its work.  
For example, if too many projects enter system test at the same time, then there might be 
a problem with computer time and disk storag e.  The facilities needs must be reconciled 
across the various projects. 
 
Planning conflicts can also arise over the ar eas affected by the projects.  If too many 
projects are all affecting the same user area, the degree of disruption could be too great.  
The timing of delivering these new systems mu st be coordinated so as not to put the 
business at risk. 
 
In doing integrated systems, the creation of a given application may depend on the results 
of a number of project teams all delivering thei r systems at the right time.  Each project's 
plans must be synchronized with all the others. 
 
The SDLC must, therefore, contain the task s for synchronizing a project's plan to the 
other plans which are linked to it. 
 
5.3.4 Tracking And Status Reporting 
 
The plan is a statement of what we guess will happen.  As the project progresses we need 
to keep track of how closely our guesses were to reality and report this to the appropriate 
people.  This is accomplished via the tracking and reporting activities. 
 
 Tracking 
 
In tracking the project we are continually co mparing the plan with our actual results.  
This requires that what we are tracking have well defined completion criteria.  Otherwise, 
how will we know if the task is done or not?  The SDLC must ensure that the completion 
criteria for each generic task is objectively, not subjectively, defined. 
 
  
 
--- p35 ---
35 
 Status Reporting 
 
There are two types of status reporting: pe riodic and checkpoint. Periodic status reports 
are prepared on a weekly, monthly, etc., basis so that management can keep track of how 
the project is doing against the plan.  These st atus reports are also a means for the project 
manager to communicate requests for assistance in resolving issues. 
 
Checkpoint reporting requires the project mana ger to summarize the overall status of the 
project and system for management when cer tain checkpoints have been reached.  These 
usually are defined by the SDLC's phases.  The objective is to bring management up to 
date as well as provide the opportunity for r eassessing whether to continue or not.  The 
SDLC must support both types of status re porting, defining the guidelines and contents 
for preparing them. 
 
 Feedback Reports 
 
There is another type of report which is  aimed at providing feedback on specific 
activities.  For example, the training effort  may have been planned in stages, using 
various training materials and methods.  After the initial round of training, there should 
be a report which summarizes how well it went.  This provides feedback to the next 
stages of training and to future projects as well. 
 
The SDLC must include the activities and re port outlines for preparing these feedback 
reports.  These include test reports, data conversion reports, training reports, facilities 
installation reports, hardware/software inst allation reports, production cutover reports, 
quality assurance review reports and post-implementation review reports. 
 
5.3.5 Change Control 
 
Projects can be described as a process contai ning four interdependent variables: time, 
function, resources and quality.  For a given amount of function, there is some minimum 
amount of time and resources required to cr eate a quality product.  If you change the 
functions, you must change time and/or res ources.  Otherwise, you reduce quality and/or 
reduce the probability that you can even deliver  the functions at all within the time and 
resource constraints. 
 
When the project was initiated, there were certain assumptions about its scope.  The 
scope was further delineated by the initial analysis and design activities used to 
determine feasibility.  If the user wants to ch ange that scope they are basically asking to 
renegotiate the "contract" that it has with the project team. 
 
Change is also disruptive.  The later that a change is requested, the more scrap and 
rework that is required.  However, since the user cannot "freeze" their environment, the 
project team cannot "freeze" the system defin ition.  What is required is a formal change 
control process. 
 
--- p36 ---
36 
 Identifying Changes 
 
The first issue in establishing formal cha nge control is delineating a change from a 
clarification.  The user will ofte n profess that what they are asking for is not a change at 
all.  It was what they thought they were getting all along.  The SDLC must ensure that the 
inventory of what is to be delivered is quickly and concisely bound. 
 
 Change Control Procedure 
 
The change control procedure contains a number of key steps.  The first is to determine 
who will decide the fate of a requested change.  The second is to define the procedures 
for submitting and evaluating changes.  The th ird is to identify the points in the SDLC 
process where each given deliverable will come  under change control.  The SDLC must 
describe how each of these steps will be accomplished. 
 
  
 Change Control And Planning 
 
Even if a change request is turned down, it takes resources to evaluate it.  While the 
evaluation process may consume only a small portion of the project's resources, it tends 
to take up a large percentage of the time of key resources.  The SDLC must ensure that 
the resources required to evaluate changes are included in the project plan. 
 
If a change request is accepted, it will require  resources to complete it.  The SDLC 
should assume that some of level of change  will occur and account for it in the planning 
process.  However, it should also provide guidance on what to do when those resources 
have been used up and the plan must be recast. 
 
5.3.6 Step Wise Commitment 
 
Receiving Concurrence To Proceed 
 
As stated before, projects are research a nd development efforts.  Therefore, it is 
unreasonable to ask management to commit to  the entire project from day one.  The 
SDLC must support the process of periodic project reviews by management of whether or 
not it will allow the project to continue.  This is an extension of what was discussed in 
the status reporting topic.  It extends the re quirements to include the specific activities to 
get management's concurrence to proceed. 
 
Commitment Versus Allocation 
 
The SDLC must differentiate between comm itting resources versus allocating them.  
When a project is authorized in the budget, the funding and people resources must be set 
aside or allocated for this effort.  Allocating the resources places the project in the "In 
Plan".  There should also be an "Out Plan" containing the lower priority projects to which 
no resources have been allocated.  As a pr oject progresses management commits, phase 
--- p37 ---
37 
by phase, to spending the allocated resources.  If it is decided to terminate the project, the 
unused allocated resources are now available to  move a project from the "Out Plan" into 
the "In Plan". 
  
 Psychological Commitment 
 
There is another type of commitment to which the SDLC must be sensitive. That is the 
psychological commitment of the project team members.  The more people that are 
involved in the project and the longer it goes on, the more difficult it is to stop it, even if 
there are periodic checkpoints for getting concurrence to proceed.  This is because people 
like to finish what they start.  It also occu rs because their professional reputations are at 
stake. 
 
The SDLC must do two things to minimize the negative aspects of this type of 
commitment.  First it must support determini ng the project's feasibility with as small a 
group as possible, with a minimum amount of  expenditure and in a minimum amount of 
time.  This minimizes the psychological invest ment of the initial team members.  Second 
it must support the concept that, in research  and development, it is still a successful 
project if you found out as quickly and as cheaply as possible that you could not do it. 
 
5.3.7 Cost/Benefit Analysis 
 
As stated before, the cost/benefit analysis is  an attempt to calculate to what degree the 
project and system will meet the objectives.  The SDLC must address two topics in its 
support of this area: the scope of the analysis and the algorithm for doing it. 
 
 Cost/Benefit Scope 
 
The benefit side of the analysis should be  expressed in quantitative terms whereever 
possible.  Qualitative or intangible benefits usually are reflections of poorly analyzed 
tangible benefits.  The SDLC should support the process of quantifying all benefits. 
 
On the costs side, the SDLC must address development costs, installation costs and on-
going operational costs.  In doing these cal culations it should differentiate between 
capital costs and expense costs. 
 
  
Cost/Benefit Algorithm 
 
The method of calculating and displaying the cost/benefit analysis can have a profound 
impact on the effectiveness of making the right project commitment decisions.  The 
calculation methods must be sophisticated e nough to take into account such things as 
cash flow, hard dollars versus soft dollars, re gional cost differences, cost trends, revenue 
trends, real and present value, residual values, tax implications, burdened and 
unburdened costs, and the impact of synergy. 
 
--- p38 ---
38 
The analysis is usually displayed on a spr ead sheet.  Since spread sheets are used 
primarily in accounting and since accounts are supposed to be 100% accurate, the 
analysis appears to be more black and white than it is.  An analysis of this sort is 
basically an educated or sophisticated guess.  There is some probability that it is off by 
some degree.  By applying such techniques as Baysian analysis, displayed on graphs, you 
begin to see the probabilistic nature of the process.  The SDLC must provide guidance on 
the method of the calculation and on the mean s of displaying the results.  Since the 
degree of accuracy depends on the amount of information available, the cost/benefit 
analysis should be an iterative process occurring at a number of points in the SDLC 
process. 
 
5.3.8 Risk Assessment 
 
Projects, being research and development effort s, entail some degree of risk.  These risks 
affect the probability of achieving the results  predicted by the cost/benefit analysis.  
There are business risks, technical risks and people related risks. 
 
For each type of risk there is an active risk and a passive risk.  Active risks define what 
might happen if you do undertake the project.  Passive risks identify what might happen 
if you do not do it. 
 
For each of all of these risks there are also upside risks and downside risks.  Upside risks 
define the minimum problems you will encounter .  The downside risks define the worst 
that could happen. 
 
The SDLC must support the process of ri sk assessment including active/passive and 
upside/downside for each type of risk.  The overall design of the SDLC should be laid out 
in such a way as to minimize risks where it can. 
 
5.3.9 Interacting With Users 
 
The user is the customer for the product bei ng delivered by the project team.  What their 
involvement is with the project usually defines the difference between success and 
failure.  The SDLC must address a number of topics in this area: identifying the stake-
holders; on-going user involvement; user systems owners and user project managers; and 
the differences between the users' environment and the project team's. 
 
 Identifying The Stake-Holders 
 
The first issue the SDLC must address in this  topic is identifying who all the users are.  
Any given project may find many di fferent user areas who feel they have a stake in it.  
These stake-holders must be identified, their roles in the project defined and their 
representatives named. 
 
 On-going User Involvement 
 
--- p39 ---
39 
The user does not just submit a project request and then review the results at the end of 
the project.  They must have an on-going role  in the development process.  The SDLC 
must identify each point in the process where they are involved and clearly delineate their 
responsibilities from those of the systems staff. 
 
 User System Owner / User Project Manager 
 
For each system there is a specific group a nd a specific manager within the systems 
department who have responsibility for it.  Un fortunately, in many organizations there is 
no counterpart within the user community.  Since a given application may affect many 
user departments, the problem arises of w ho decides what should or should not be done 
to the system.  This is often resolved by committee or, by default, by the systems team.  
There is a requirement for each system to ha ve an identified individual from each area 
who has responsibility for representing that area's position.  There is also a need for one 
of these users to be designated the primary system owner.  The SDLC should explicitly 
support this concept. 
 
For a given project, only a few of the areas a ffected by the total system may be involved.  
In such cases, there is a need to designate  which user representative will be the user 
project manager.  The SDLC must support this  concept and differentiate it from the user 
system owner concept. 
 
 User Versus Systems Environment 
 
A fundamental difference exists between mo st user organizations and the systems 
organization.  Most user organizations are i nvolved in managing a process.  A process is 
a repetitious activity and is managed by exception.  It is very predictable.  The systems 
group does projects.  Projects are research and development.  By nature they are 
unpredictable until the research portion is done. 
 
This difference leads to some fundamental  problems.  The users can quickly and 
accurately state what the impact of a specific request will be on their work load.  They do 
not always understand why the systems group cannot do the same thing in estimating 
their project requests.  Therefore, they tr y to control the project by prematurely fixing 
dates since they can read a calendar.  They fix resources since they can read a spread 
sheet.  What they have difficulty in quantifying is function and its relationship to meeting 
the objectives. 
 
The result is that, for many projects, the objective becomes to deliver something, 
anything, by the stated date within the stat ed budget.  Whether this meets the business 
objectives is immaterial.  Under these circumstances, the project team takes the path of 
least resistance in getting the project "com pleted".  The SDLC and the accompanying 
disciplines go out the window. 
 
--- p40 ---
40 
The SDLC must be designed in such a way as to  reflect this very real issue.  If it does 
not, even if it meets every other objective and requirement stated in this document, it will 
only be a pile of unused paper. 
 
5.3.10 Managing Vendors 
 
More and more, systems groups rely on the pr oducts and services of outside vendors in 
order to accomplish their goals.  Products ra nge from acquiring the hardware/software 
configuration the application will run on, the application itself, and the tools used to 
create and maintain the applications.  Services range from supplemental resources to 
cover peak load resource demands to consultants with specialized skills.  The SDLC must 
include the activities for ensuring the eff ective use of vendor supplied products and 
services. 
 
 Evaluating Vendors/Products 
 
The SDLC must include the activities for first deciding whether outside products or 
services are even needed.  If they are n eeded, the SDLC must provide guidance on when 
and how to evaluate the viability of the pr oduct/service and how to evaluate the viability 
of the vendor. 
 
 Pre-Contract Vendor Interaction 
 
Many vendor situations are competitive.  This requires that the process of vendor 
interaction, prior to selecting the final one, must be fair.  Otherwise, there is a legal 
exposure.  This is especially true where gove rnment contracts are involved as part of the 
overall project.  The SDLC must define th e process of preparing and disseminating 
requests for information and requests for prices. 
 
 Contract Definition 
 
Once a vendor is selected, the details of the contract must be defined and negotiated.  
This is not just a task for the legal departme nt.  The legal department essentially "codes" 
into the contract the requirements given to  it by the users and systems groups.  Without 
these requirements the contract suffers from  the same result that would happen if the 
systems group built a system without user requirements. 
 
The SDLC must identify all the contract issues, in easy to understand terms, that must be 
considered from a business and technical perspective.  It must also identify the points in 
the development process where the legal staff interacts with the rest of the project team. 
--- p41 ---
41 
 Contract Management 
 
Even after the contract has been signed ther e are issues concerning managing to the letter 
and spirit of the contract.  You can, by your actions, inadvertently redefine the terms of 
the carefully defined contract. 
 
There is also the topic of issue resolution.  Re solving issues with a third party is vastly 
different than resolving internal issues.  The SDLC must provide guidance on all aspects 
of contract management that the project team will have to directly contend with. 
 
5.3.11 Post Implementation Reviews 
 
Post implementation reviews were mentioned before in the reports section.  However, 
this topic needs further definition in our re quirements.  The post implementation review 
provides an analysis of and feedback on the project and the system created by the project.  
The objective of the review is to see how well things went and to provide feedback on 
how to improve things the next time around. 
 
 The project was initiated on an assumption that there was going to be a specific ROI 
resulting from the effort.  The review evalua tes to what extent this was achieved.  The 
review looks to see how well the user requirements were met by the system.  It also looks 
at how well the team did in meeting the pl an, how well the system installation effort 
went, how well the SDLC and tools worked, a nd how well the project team worked with 
the users and each other. 
 
The SDLC should support a thorough post implementation review process.  Since some 
things can best be evaluated while they are fresh in everyone's mind and others need the 
perspective of time, this process should be performed at intervals. 
 
5.3.12 Quality Assurance Reviews 
 
In developing systems, the systems are comp lex and the process that produces them is 
complex.  What is needed to ensure that everything is going well and as perceived by the 
team is an independent expert review.  This is the quality assurance review. 
 
The objective of the Q/A review process is to ensure that quality products are produced 
within the project's constraints.  There are two basic ways to approach this process.  One 
is via the policeman role and the other is a more proactive role. 
 
In the policeman approach, products are reviewed after they are completed.  
Unfortunately, it is then often difficult to implement any of the recommendations because 
the costs of rework would be prohibitive. 
 
In a proactive role, the Q/A process begi ns when the approach to producing the 
deliverable is being decided.  The Q/A staff then guides the team in the use of any of the 
--- p42 ---
42 
tools and techniques they may need but are not experienced in.  While some objectivity is 
lost, the goal of producing quality systems is better met. 
 
The SDLC must support a proactive and timel y role for the quality assurance review 
process.  It must identify all the points in the process where the Q/A reviews are 
performed and provide guidance on how to do them.  It must also keep clear the 
distinction between the Q/A review processes and the testing processes. 
 
5.3.13 Recurring Nature Of Management Tasks 
 
With the exception of defining a project's objectives, each of the management topics 
discussed above contains recurring tasks thr oughout the project lifecycle.  Plans must be 
continually updated to reflect the current understanding of the project's scope.  The 
cost/benefit analysis and risk assessments must be revised at various points in the project.  
The SDLC must identify all the points in the project where it is necessary to revisit each 
of these topics and define exactly what must be addressed at each point. 
 
5.4 SDLC Usability Requirements 
 
5.4.1 Types Of Users 
 
The SDLC is a complex system.  Its users ar e the systems staff and anyone else who is 
attached to the project team for the dura tion of the effort.  This includes user 
representatives, legal staff, vendor personnel, etc.  The material must be organized in 
such a way that any given SDLC user can go directly to the pieces that concern them 
without wading through the entire thing. 
 
 5.4.2 Levels Of Expertise 
 
Another usability concern that the SDLC must address is the varying levels of expertise 
that the users will have.  Some will be expe rt users who only need a checklist level of 
detail to ensure that they do not forget anything.  Others will be knowledgeable users 
who will want a refresher on a specific topi c.  Some will be experienced at doing 
systems, but need to understand the specifics of this SDLCs approach.  Still others will 
be novices at doing systems in general. 
 
For each of these cases the SD LC must ensure that the appropriate level of detail is 
available and that it is easy to access according to the user's needs. 
 
5.4.3 Realistic 
 
Perhaps the uppermost thing that will affect the acceptance of the SDLC will be to what 
degree it reflects a realistic way to do project s.  The SDLC must not be a theoretical 
exercise which describes the best way to do things in an idealized environment.  
--- p43 ---
43 
Everything in the SDLC, in part and in total,  should have been done on real projects with 
real people and real constraints.  It must be a proven way of doing projects. 
 
5.4.4 Examples Of Deliverables 
 
One problem the SDLC must overcome is semantics.  The same word may mean vastly 
different things to different people.  "R equirements" may mean just a high level 
description to one person and a detailed defin ition to another.  It may just describe 
function or it may also include performance, usability, etc.  It may or may not include the 
objectives. 
 
The only viable way around this is to include specific examples of what each output from 
the SDLC contains and what it looks like.  Id eally this should be done three ways.  First, 
there should be an example of each deliver able - e.g., the requirements document - along 
side the formal definition of its structure and contents. 
 
Second, there should be examples that show  the state of each deliverable after each 
process that changes it.  This helps clarify exactly what each step really does. 
 
Third, there should be a case study showing a complete set of documentation for one 
system and project.  This shows how each of the documents relate to each other. 
 
5.5 Installation Support Requirements 
 
The total SDLC is a large and complex system containing many tasks, tools and 
techniques.  It usually represents a major cultural change from what the staff have been 
doing in the past.  It must be installed w ith the same kind of planning and support given 
to installing any complex system.  That pr ocess requires training, guidance and a phased 
installation. 
 
5.5.1 Installation Planning 
 
The SDLC should provide guidance on the overall approach to installing it.  This 
installation strategy should identify the high leverage items, identify interdependencies 
between the installation modules and the re quired CASE tools, software engineering 
techniques and training courses. 
 
 
5.5.2 Training 
 
There must be adequate training courses av ailable to teach people the overall SDLC as 
well as the various tools and techniques used within it.  The training should have specific 
courses aimed at the technical staff, system s management and the users.  The training 
should also be pragmatic, using real world examples as much as possible. 
 
--- p44 ---
44 
(Note: Training should be conducted by people who have actual experience in using what 
they are teaching - not just "talking heads" familiar with the course notes.) 
 
5.5.3 Guidance 
 
You do not learn how to do something in a cl ass room.  You really learn it by doing it, 
preferably under the guidance of experien ced people.  The SDLC should provide 
guidance on how the guides will be trained and on how they should perform their duties. 
 
--- p45 ---
45 
Chapter 6   SDLC Design 
 
Given the SDLC's objectives and requirements, there are certain architectural level 
design approaches which seem better suited to m eeting the stated needs.  In some cases it 
would be impossible to meet the requireme nts via any other design.  These key design 
points are: 
 
- The SDLC must be an example of itself. 
 
- The SDLC must use a layered/iterative approach. 
 
- The SDLC must keep distinct what must be done from how it is done. 
 
- The SDLC must be organized in a hierarchical manner. 
 
- There should be automated support for the SDLC itself. 
 
6.1 An Example Of Itself 
 
The SDLC is a system used to analyze, de sign and install systems.  Therefore, the 
approach it espouses should be applicable to itself.  This should manifest itself in two 
ways: format and contents. 
 
 
 
6.1.1 Format 
 
Most SDLCs today recommend the use of a number of the software engineering 
techniques for displaying the processes and data of a system.  Therefore, the SDLC itself 
should use these techniques.  It could use hierarchy charts, data flow diagrams and 
structured English to describe the processe s.  It could use entity-relationship diagrams 
and data structure charts to describe the data produced. 
 
There are many alternative structured techni ques for displaying this information.  The 
specific techniques chosen are less important than  the fact that a set is used consistently 
throughout the SDLC. 
 
6.1.2 Contents 
 
If you use the SDLC it should result in a system with a certain structure.  The grouping of 
functions and data should conform to the rules of the recommended structured design 
approach.  The level of detail should also conform to those rules. 
 
Tasks would be bound by such parameters as what they produce, who does them and 
when they must occur.  For example, it would be desirable to have all of the testing tasks 
--- p46 ---
46 
in separate "modules" since these might be done  by a separate test team.  A similar case 
can be made for data analysis and data design, training, hardware installation and many 
other activities. 
 
Attention must also be paid to the boundaries of automation.  It is desirable to have the 
tasks delineated in enough detail so that specific tasks could point to the CASE tool that 
should be used to do it.  Without this delin eation it gets difficult to integrate the CASE 
system with the SDLC. 
 
An area of special concern is the definition of data.  It is rare that an SDLC treats the 
deliverables produced by the process as true data bases.  The deliverables must be 
organized into subject data bases and defined down to the element level. The 
relationships - i.e., pointers - to the other data bases must be defined. 
 
One constraint that most SDLCs fall into is the fact that the project's deliverables are 
usually paper documents.  Paper data bases present some severe problems, primarily in 
the area of data redundancy.  The SDLC should take the approach that it can be creating 
true, normalized data bases which reside in a project dictionary, also called the project 
encyclopedia. 
 
If this data base approach is used, then the various documents just become reports off the 
data base.  For example, a data conversion specification must contain the description of 
the old and new file formats.  However, this information also exists in the design 
documents for the current system and the new system.  This information could get out of 
sync.  However, if it is in the data base just once and the document definition just does an 
"include" when it is generated, the problem goes away. 
 
This data base view is also absolutely criti cal to fully realizing the potential of the CASE 
tools.  The CASE tools integrate through this da ta base.  Without it we are left with a set 
of stand-alone tools with little overall integrity. 
 
6.2 A Layered Approach 
 
There are only two basic architectures to an  SDLC.  One is the traditional sequential 
approach wherein you first do all the analysis , then all the design and then look at the 
installation issues.  Analysis, design and inst allation are each in discrete phases.  The 
other approach is the layered, sometimes calle d iterative, approach.  In it analysis, design 
and installation preparation are each pushed dow n to a specific level of detail in a given 
phase.  In the next phase they are all pushed down to a further level of detail. 
 
The sequential approach just does not work in anything but the smallest project.  It also 
does not reflect how people really do system s.  A layered approach is required to 
minimize scrap and rework, improve planning, minimize risks and improve quality. 
--- p47 ---
47 
 
6.2.1 Minimize Scrap And Rework 
 
Obviously, analysis drives design which in turn drives installation and production 
support.  However, there is also a feedback loop here.  The structure of the design may 
change the scope of analysis.  For example, there are different considerations in defining 
the requirements for an on-line system versus  a batch system.  On-line systems need 
better ergonomics, are more sensitive to perfor mance issues, and are more tightly linked 
and interspersed into the user's everyday wo rk.  Therefore, design decisions such as on-
line versus batch, centralized versus distributed, automated versus manual, etc., greatly 
affect the process of analysis. 
 
Similarly, installation issues can affect the design and the scope of analysis.  For 
example, the requirements and design may be  based on certain assumptions about the 
structure and contents of the desired data ba ses for the new system.  The data conversion 
analysis and planning effort may reveal that those data bases cannot be created from the 
existing files without undue risks and costs.  When the new design calls for integrated 
data bases where stand-alone files existed before, it is not unusual for the data bases 
conversion effort to cost as much as the re st of the entire project combined.  Thus, the 
project might need to be scaled back. 
 
Similarly, the needs for problem management may require that diagnostic probe points be 
built into the system.  This can have a major impact on many aspects of the design. 
 
In yet another example, when training is l ooked at, the team may decide that the best 
approach is to build a training mode into the production system.  Again, this can have a 
major impact on the design. 
 
We could easily provide examples of each as pect of design affecting analysis and each 
aspect of installation support and producti on support affecting analysis and design.  
There is a tight feedback loop among these activities.  They must proceed in parallel and 
in sync. 
 
6.2.2 Improve Planning 
 
As stated in the planning section, the cornerst one of the plan is th e completeness of the 
task list.  Since projects are research and de velopment, the tasks list cannot be completed 
until the research portion of the project is  completed.  As long as you are still doing 
research you do not know all of the tasks a nd, therefore, you do not know the costs or 
schedule. 
--- p48 ---
48 
    
If the SDLC is a sequential one, then you mi ght still be doing research until near the end 
of the project.  Many sequential lifecycles do not address the installation issues until 
coding is complete.  These late discoveries may totally change the economic viability of 
the project. 
 
If you look at Figure 2 you see the economic im pact of the sequential approach.  The 
initial projections showed a reasonable prof it from doing the project.  After a lot of 
money has been spent, new estimates revise this picture.  However, the development cost 
to date is already spent money.  It is gone .  Do you now continue  on or write off the 
project? 
 
Figure 3 shows the basic difference between the sequential approach and the layered 
approach in regards to fully scoping the proj ect.  (In the figure equate "field support" 
with "production support".) Using a sequential approach you are 31/40ths into the project 
before you have completed the last bit of re search.  Using the layered approach you are 
only 4/40ths into the project. 
 
In actual experience, the research portion can be completed in about ten percent of the 
project's schedule but with just five to seve n percent of the final resources.  The project 
estimates are usually accurate to about plus or  minus five percent.  This is for staff 
experienced in using a rigorous layered approach. 
 
--- p49 ---
49 
 
 
Do you write off $500,000 or do you spend $700,000 
more and lose only $200,000. 
 
Figure 2 
--- p50 ---
50 
 
  Sequential Approach – 31/40 
  Layered Approach     –   4/40 
   
Figure 3 
--- p51 ---
51 
 
6.2.3 Minimize Risks 
 
Unknowns represent risks.  There are business risks, technical risks and people oriented 
risks as discussed earlier.  By using a formal layered approach the unknowns are 
eliminated early and any difficult problems to  overcome quickly identified.  This gives 
the project team and the rest of the organization plenty of lead time to deal with them. 
 
6.2.4 Improve Quality 
 
The layered approach has a major impact on the quality of the product.  By minimizing 
scrap and rework it avoids the temptation to ma ke quick and dirty adjustments just to get 
something done.  The integrity of the design structure can be maintained. 
 
Perhaps the biggest impact it has on quality is allowing the project team the time to build 
quality into the product.  Initial schedules are usually just someone's guess based on 
wishful thinking.  However, the longer everyone assumes that that date can be made, the 
more it is locked in concrete.  The rest of the organization begins making plans around 
that date.  Later it becomes apparent to the proj ect team that that date is unattainable with 
the full function at the desired level of qualit y.  The team takes numerous short cuts to 
meet the date.  The SDLC goes out the wi ndow, along with the rest of the software 
engineering techniques and CASE tools. 
 
POOR SCHEDULES ARE THE SINGLE BIGGEST FACTOR IN POOR QUALITY. 
 
6.2.5 Faux Layered Approaches 
 
Many SDLC vendors who have sequential lifecycl es just tell the client that they can 
execute the phases in parallel and get the same  effect.  This is blatantly not true.  A 
layered SDLC must contain many specific task s to keep the various products in sync 
during their parallel development.  These tasks are missing from sequential lifecycles. 
 
One area of the SDLC design where this is mo st glaring is in the design of the data.  
Sequential lifecycles tend to organize data in to the "everything you know as a result of 
this phase" data base.  In an application syst em this is equivalent to designing data bases 
solely on when the data was created.  Thus  you would have the 9AM data base and the 
6PM data base. 
 
In a layered approach the data structures must be clearly distinct from the phases.  This 
allows the data bases to be updated as you go, both within a phase and across phases.  
(Kind of like a real system). 
 
Another weak argument sequential lifecycles tr y to make is that there is a feasibility 
phase which scopes all these things out.  Un fortunately, these feasibility phases are not 
very specific on how much detail is needed about each topic.  They do not cover all of the 
research topics, usually omitting most or  all the installation and production support 
--- p52 ---
52 
issues.  They do not tell you how to do these high level tasks.  They usually just state that 
you should follow the descriptions given for doi ng the detailed work.  However, this is 
not always the best approach to the architect ure level, nor is it easy to extract the high 
level tasks from the low level ones. 
 
REMEMBER - EVERY FAILED PROJECT HAD A FEASIBILITY STUDY THAT 
SAID IT WAS VIABLE. 
 
The layered approach supplies a truly rigorous way to determine the project's economic 
and technical viability. 
 
6.3 Delineate What From How 
 
The SDLC should clearly separate what tasks must be done from how they are done.  The 
SDLC must clearly separate what informati on a task produces from how that information 
is displayed.  This is required to ensure flexibility and maintainability in the lifecycle. 
 
6.3.1 Flexibility 
 
The best way to do a task or display in formation is dependent on the CASE tools 
available, the experience of the team in th e use of the techniques, and the techniques 
being used on other, tightly related, projects.   This distinction between what and how 
applies to all the technical tasks and the management tasks as well. 
 
Some CASE tools themselves are context de pendent.  For certain categories of tools you 
need a different one for each programming language and/or DBMS and/or machine 
and/or operating system.  Since these tools will often come from different vendors, they 
will reflect differing approaches to the same task.  You may have to conform how a task 
is done to the tool you must use. 
 
By decoupling the what from the how the pr oject team has more flexibility in choosing 
the best way for them to get things done within the reality of their constraints. 
 
6.3.2 Maintainability 
 
The software engineering techniques are s till evolving.  The CASE tools are evolving 
rapidly.  These tools and techniques describe how something gets done.  However, with it 
all, the what has remained very stable.  Pl ans still contain tasks, dependencies, resources, 
schedules and budgets.  They have for literally centuries since the first formal projects 
were undertaken in construction efforts.  Wh at has changed is how we display the plan 
and the techniques used for creating it.  The same can be said for analysis and design, etc. 
 
If the SDLC clearly separates what from how, the impact of the (maintenance) changes is 
minimized.  Everyone will still have a stable  framework on which to hang the new tools 
and techniques. 
--- p53 ---
53 
 
 
6.4 Hierarchical Structure 
 
Given the scope and complexity of the SDLC it will be a large system by any measure.  
This information is usually embodied in many manuals.  The issue is organizing the 
materials so that the desired information can be quickly found at just the right level of 
detail.  In the usability requirements section we discussed the various levels of expertise 
that the SDLC users will have.  The expert us er should not have to wade through piles of 
detail to get the overview checklists that they  need.  Novice users should be able to find 
detailed tutorials on topics that are new to them. 
 
This requires that the information is layere d in a hierarchy going from less detailed to 
more detailed as you go deeper.  There would be a checklist level, possibly represented 
by a reference card.  There could be several levels which define what is done.  There 
would then be the lowest level which contains the tutorials on how to do something.  This 
level could further point to the best reference books available on the topic. 
 
6.5 SDLC Automated Support 
 
SDLCs are often referred to as a beached whal e.  This is because the large number of 
binders, when opened to expose their rings, give the appearance of the ribs of some giant 
dead animal.  It is also cumbersome to maneuver around with them. 
 
What is desirable is that the information in  the binders also be available on-line.  The 
SDLC tool would allow an i ndividual to quickly navigate through the appropriate levels 
of detail that they desire.  There would be no need for everyone to have a large pile of 
manuals on their desk or to go hunt up the right manual when they needed it. 
 
Having an automated version of the SDLC is also a major aid to the project manager.  
The SDLC is the superset generic task list, with dependencies and task overlaps 
identified.  The SDLC should also have tailo ring guides for fitting it to specific types of 
projects.  If this information were available on-line the manager could quickly tailor the 
SDLC automatically via a project profile checklis t.  This could then be ported over to the 
project planning tool as the base line plan. 
 
There already exist such tools in the ma rket place (e.g., Nastec's Lifecycle Manager 
product) which allow you to load your own SDLC into it.  However, the SDLC must be 
designed in a modular enough manner to make this possible. 
 
Chapter 7   SDLC Project 
 
It should be clear from the objectives that creating/selecting an SDLC is an important 
project.  From the requirements and design point s it should be clear that this is a large 
--- p54 ---
54 
and complex project.  When you factor in the training and guidance issues it gets larger 
yet. 
 
This is not a project which can be successfully executed via a part-time committee.  It is a 
full time job.  It also requires people who have the right level of expertise on this topic.  
Successfully producing systems using an SD LC does not guarantee that the person has 
the skill to create and install an SDLC.  For example, you can successfully use a phone 
without being able to build one.  You can su ccessfully drive a car without being able to 
design one.  The SDLC is complex enough that  it takes years to learn how to build, 
install and maintain one. 
 
The users for this project are the systems sta ff themselves.  The user representatives to 
the SDLC project team must have a good understanding of their requirements and the 
impact of various design approaches.  It is no different than their relationship with the 
users of the applications that they build and maintain.  In the final analysis this is what 
this whole document has been about. 
 
   
--- p55 ---
55 
 
COMMON SDLC QUESTIONS 
 
 
The following questions are those most often asked in introducing a new life cycle.  They 
and their respective answers give some insight into the concerns and attitude of the staff. 
 
 
1.We already have a life cycle.  It did not work.  Why will this time be any different? 
 
The existing life cycle was designed some time ago.  As with any system, a life 
cycle can get out of date.  The current one does not reflect the advances in 
software engineering.  It also does not adequately support more complex systems 
(e.g. on-line, database.  In addition, this time more attention is being paid to the 
installation support requirements -- training, guidance, tools.  However, success 
will primarily depend on the level of commitment of everyone involved.) 
 
 
2. This life cycle was not developed here specifically for us.  How do we know it will 
meet our needs? 
 
This life cycle was selected after an analysis of our requirements.  As with 
acquiring any package, we must do some level of tailoring to adapt it to our 
organization.  The tailoring required should be relatively minor.  The basic tasks 
and techniques required to build and support systems does not vary much from 
company to company, nor even from industry to industry. 
 
 
3. The life cycle is too detailed.  There is too much to read.  I just want a checklist. 
 
Building systems is a complex process.  Any book that tries to describe that 
process will be big.  However, you do not need to read it all at one sitting.  Read 
the overview material first.  Then read the remainder as you need it. Once you are 
familiar with the material, the table of contents provides the checklist. 
 
 
4. The life cycle is not detailed enough.  It addresses what to do but not exactly how to do 
it. 
 
To address every "how to" would not be feasible.  It would also be redundant with 
the many books that already exist covering the various techniques.  The life cycle 
provides a context for the other books by showing how the pieces fit together into 
a coherent whole. 
 
5. The terminology is confusing.  It is not what I am used to. 
--- p56 ---
56 
 
Unfortunately there is no standard terminology in the industry today.  A 
requirements document, functional specification, external specification and 
logical specification are all terms used for the document which describes what the 
user wants.  The life cycle just had to select one set of terminology and go with it.  
As with learning the file names and data names in any system, the problem will 
go away shortly. 
 
 
6. There are just too many tasks and too much documentation to produce.  I do not have 
time to do all this.  (Or)  I do not need to do all this. 
 
The life cycle provides the superset of the tasks and documents which must be 
considered.  It must be intelligently subsetted and tailored to fit your project.  For 
example, not every project will result in the acquisition and installation of new 
hardware. 
 
 
7. (Variant of #6.) It would take too long on my type of project.  Why should I use it? 
 
The life cycle was designed with the various project types and sizes in mind.  
Again, it is primarily a case of proper subsetting.  The alternative would be to 
have a different life cycle for every project type.  This is unnecessary, costly and 
leads to numerous technical and business problems.  If there is some aspect of the 
life cycle which makes it difficult to tailor it to your projects, let us know.  We 
will work with you and fix it. 
 
 
8. I believe this is all necessary, but my user will not give me enough time on the 
schedule to do it. 
 
In building systems there are only three variables:  time, function and resources.  
If we fix time, either function must be reduced or resources added.  To produce 
the function in a reliable manner requires that we go through the tasks noted in 
the life cycle.  Taking shortcuts increases the risk of not meeting the schedule and 
impacts the quality of the product.  We need to work with the users to put the 
focus on their total objectives and not just dates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. I'd like to use all this but the time required to learn all this would impact our schedules 
too much. 
--- p57 ---
57 
 
In installing the life cycle and CASE tools, we must be sensitive to the effect of 
the learning curve.  Therefore, you would rarely expect to install everything on a 
single project.  We will start with those topics which will be most important to 
your project.  We will also provide timely training and guidance to reduce the 
impact of the learning curve.  In effect we are trading off the time you normally 
spend trying to figure out how to do the project -- basically defining your own life 
cycle.  Therefore, the impact should be kept to a minimum. 
 
 
10. How are you guys going to train us if you are still learning the life cycle? 
 
Your focus will be on learning your users business needs and building a system to 
meet them.  In the initial projects, our focus will be on learning the life cycle.  
Therefore, we should be able to stay ahead of your needs in this area.  Also, we 
will get help from qualified outside sources as necessary. 
 
 
11. My project has already started.  Do I have to go back and redo everything? 
 
No!  We will use the life cycle as a checklist to ensure that there is nothing 
missing from what you have done already.  Then we will use it to help you plan 
the rest of the project. 
 
 
12. I could be doing more productive things.  Why do I have to do all this? 
 
First of all, you only do those things which are applicable to your project.  (See 
answer to #6.  Also, if you feel that there are more productive tasks that are not a 
part of the life cycle, let us know what they are.  Either we need to fix the life 
cycle, or there is a misunderstanding of what it says.) 
 
 
13. The life cycle puts a lot of emphasis on working with the user to get all their 
objectives and functional requirements.  Won't that expand the project to the point where 
nothing will get done? 
 
Again, this goes back to the trade-offs between time, function and resources.  
Also, if we are not getting this direction from the user it means we are making the 
decisions for them.  In effect, we would be running their business, which is 
obviously inappropriate.  Doing this up front also reduces the probability of 
significant changes in the scope of the project later. 
 
 
14. My project is a low risk one.  Why should I use the life cycle? 
 
--- p58 ---
58 
To make sure it stays low risk. 
 
 
15. I am already doing most of this my own way.  Why should I learn this life cycle? 
 
If you are already doing most of this, it should make it easy for you to learn.  The 
issue is that when each individual has their own way of doing things, it is hard to 
fit people into a coherent team.  Also, on a given project you may (under the 
project pressures forget to do some of the things you know you should do.  The 
life cycle acts as a repository of our collective experience.) 
 
 
16. Why should I use it?  Nobody else is. 
 
In order to provide adequate support we will be installing the life cycle a few 
teams at a time.  Eventually, everyone will be using it. 
 
 
17. What's in it for me if I use it? 
 
Learning the life cycle and the associated tools and techniques provides you with 
an opportunity to improve your professionalism.  Also, the quality of the systems 
produced will be better.  This means less scrap and rework to cover omissions, 
easier maintenance changes and fewer midnight calls to fix bugs.  As the systems 
get more complex and require much higher reliability these skills will be 
necessary for your own continued success in this profession. 
 
 
18. I have been successful for years without using a formal life cycle.  Why do I need one 
now?  (Alternative)  This stuff is great for the future but why do I need to learn it now? 
 
The skills and degree of formality required to build our current systems or install 
packages or perform maintenance are inadequate to build integrated, on-line, 
and/or database systems.  The reliability, extendibility and usability factors are far 
more stringent.  Also, given the amount of development to be done we must 
increase our productivity.  If we don't start learning these techniques until we 
absolutely must have them, we will be overwhelmed by the learning curve.  We 
will be learning new tools and techniques, new business functions and new 
technology.  The risk would be too high.  We must learn as much as possible 
while we are still working with familiar technology and functions (i.e. on our 
current projects.  Plus, there are definite gains to be made in our productivity and 
systems quality even without the added impetus of the future needs.) 
 
 
19. A formalized life cycle affects my creativity and individuality. 
 
--- p59 ---
59 
A formalized life cycle focuses the creativity into meeting the business needs.  In 
that context the optimum in creativity is taking a very complex problem and 
providing a simple, cost effective solution.  As for individuality, building systems 
requires teamwork.  Your individuality is only affected to the extent required to 
work within the framework of a team. 
 
 
20. I'm just a coder.  Why do I need to know all this? 
 
You don't.  Your tasks are well delineated.  More importantly, you can see how 
your tasks fit into the whole and who is producing the information you need to do 
your job. 
 
 
21. My current system is already documented.  Do I have to redo the documentation to fit 
the new formats? 
 
No.  The contents of the life cycle documents can be used as a checklist, though, 
to validate how complete your documentation is. 
 
 
22. My current system is not documented.  Should I go back and document it? 
 
Use the life cycle documentation as a checklist to identify what you should have.  
Then separate what you must have from what would be nice to have.  Generally, 
the key pieces of documentation would be a systems flowchart, a functional 
hierarchy chart cross referenced to the programs, and data layouts.  The remaining 
documentation should be created as by products of making changes as opposed to 
making it a separate project. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. Even as a project manager some of the tasks in the life cycle are outside of my 
responsibilities.  How are they important to me? 
 
The life cycle lists all the tasks which may be required to develop and install a 
system regardless of who will be assigned to do them.  If a task is outside your 
responsibility, you should at least ensure that someone is addressing it.  
Otherwise, you may not be able to complete the project. 
 
 
--- p60 ---
60 
24. The life cycle calls for a lot of user invol vement throughout the project.  My user will 
not commit to that level of effort.  What should I do? 
 
We are doing the system for the user.  How do we know what they need without 
their help?  If there is insufficient user support, you must evaluate the risks of 
proceeding.  Generally, projects with complex business functions or which have a 
major impact on a lot of the user's personnel would be too risky without major 
support.  The resources would be better spent on another project.  Therefore, if 
you feel the risks are too great to proceed, you should escalate the issue to your 
management. 
 
 
25. Does management really support this? 
 
Management realizes they cannot meet their business objectives without good 
systems support -- high quality systems built in a productive, cost efficient 
manner.  The fact that they are investing time, money and resources in the life 
cycle, tools and training is evidence of the support for this effort. 
 